# Postmortem: Grit by Angela Duckworth
postmortem thoughts-and-opinions

A few years ago, one started this book; till today, it's not yet finished, two chapters to go. This book is one of the few, that one started out with negative emotions. To prove that grit isn't that important, because when one score oneself on the grit scale, it's 2 of 5 (average is 3 of 5). Yet, one don't see oneself as a failure, despite low grit. Overconfidence? Maybe. Probably an unwillingness to face oneself. 

After reading 4 chapters, one put the book aside, tag it "not useful", and move on. Particularly, one was desperately learning about how to make friends, how to retain friends, how to have deep relationships, so, one couldn't see how grit helps that time (except for negatively making people annoying because one won't give up "disturbing" them, and finally block oneself). 

As one moved past that stage, one started to read more broadly. Still, the tag "not useful", now under a new tag "uninterested", prevents one from picking back up the book. Life continues on. 

Until a point, when there are so many books and so many people speaking, "grit grit grit," then one would consider reconsidering grit. A few months ago, with skepticism, one resumed the book. One chapter by one chapter, until one reached the word: passion. 

Now one knows why. If you'd read one's articles before, you'd know one had a strong distaste for the word "passion." One truly believes, we shouldn't have passion on our job, because passion is an extremely strong emotion that quickly lead to burnout. It's like a fire out of control. By the time you realize, you're out of fuel. Instead, if the word "passion" was replaced with "enjoyment," one would have accepted it. Unlike passion, enjoyment equals a small, soft fire. It throws away the intensity of passion, in preference of keeping it burn as long as possible. And grit is to keep at something for long, as far as one understand, so **it needs enjoyment, not passion**. 

Except for "passion" (a.k.a. "interest"), one gradually find usefulness in the other three traits: practice, purpose, and hope. 

Author mentioned that improvement requires deliberate practice, whereas flow doesn't help with improvement. One don't agree. One agrees that flow is an experience, where you start flow experience minutes after entering an activity. You'd probably read about how flow helps keep one focused on an activity, and achieved, say, 200% or 500% or whatever percent of what non-flow accomplishes. If the activity is learning, one hypothesize that flow also let you learn at 200% of 500% or whatever percent the speed of non-flow learning. Prove it not! 

What if one's calling is "to make friends?" A more self-focused, smaller circle of influence calling; than something that helps a larger circle, because "who cares?" There are people who cares, like those extremums at Effective Altruism (EA). In fact, EA let me realize that one cares more about my friends than others. While it's interesting to know that people do care about animals, and generally one agree of not torturing animals, one don't agree with putting animal's importance above human's. And not strangers above friends. Probably it's not the time for one's calling yet, for one still haven't had "acquire" friends to a state where one feels satisfied with one's situations, that one's willing to look for something larger. Only when one acquires something, can one says, yes, now that's semi-stable and require less attention, then only one can start looking for something else. 

Last but not least, one'd be careful where one applies grit. Grit applied in the correct area is grit; grit applied in the wrong area is stubbornness. Example, you have an idea of how things work, and you're too gritty to change your mind of how things work; that's grit, stubborn grit. In fact, Adam Grant, mentioned in his book _Think Again_, mentioned that grit can be a roadblock in rethinking; for one's too focused on the task at hand that one refused to think again before getting it done. Instead, applying a checkup every 6 months (or whatever interval) on your direction, plus grit, will do best. 

This is best illustrated in an example. Imagine you're rowing a boat to the UK, starting from China. Let's assume there's no landmass in between to block your way, for the sake of the example. However, you're actually facing the wrong direction, and would end up in Australia. If you'd stop and check your compass, you'd know you went the wrong direction. However, being too gritty, you want to only get to your destiny, so you keep rowing, "almost, almost, we're almost there, just a little more..." And you end up at the wrong place. Moral of the story? Grit only takes care of the distance, not the direction. You need something else to take care of the direction, and change course if you move in the wrong direction.  

### Discussions
[Post any suggestions here](https://github.com/Wabinab/Wabinab.github.io/discussions/2), one'll read it and consider the changes. 

### Notes: 
1. In work, one's quite gritty, especially if the stuffs is interesting, one'll see it to the end. Outside work, it has to be a hobby that's interesting, like a hobby project, that keeps one's mind occupied, unable to put it down. 
2. One used to do something intensely and keep at it for 3 months, before burning out and "don't want to touch it anymore" feeling comes. That happens throughout secondary school, more than ten times. Since then, one understand that, if one wants to remain interested in something, one cannot work to burnout. To not work to burnout, one had to extinguish the flame of passion. If one don't, passion will haunts one, keeping one's mind at the task all day long. 
3. It's one of the Stoic principles that one don't agree -- that you can be by yourself. It's true that you can find joy by yourself, but one can't agree, and refuse to agree. For one's anchor on the world is to make deep friends, not those disposable ones, or those that only want to be friends for a few years and move on, but one that lasts for several decades. Without the anchor, one generally lose meaning, and risk committing suicide. 
4. There's a Stoic saying that says, don't procrastinate, as you can't be sure that you'll be living on tomorrow. That means, you could _hope_ for your future, but be prepare to die anytime today. What can you do now, on the spot, to not feel regret, if you don't live to see the sun tomorrow? (assuming you don't live at the poles)
5. As usual, some arguments are based on hypotheses than experiments. Be careful to test them out, and notify one if it's wrong. [Post any problems here](https://github.com/Wabinab/Wabinab.github.io/discussions/2). 