# Afterthought: Sapiens by Yuval Noah Harari
afterthought

The Cognitive Revolution of _Homo Sapiens_ opens a new world before us: the capability to imagine fictional entities. Myth, God, Limited Liability Companies (**LLC**) (Google, Apple, Tesla), Laws; they all exist in our imaginations. Common beliefs pave the road to large scale cooperations, like trading, or hunting down a giant mammal, among different tribes. 

> It really strikes one, when the author said that lawyers are no different from shamans whom perform some magical enchantation that raise LLC to life. 

How humans exit Africa and spread across continent is a mystery. The notion that someone long before the Dutch invented ocean-going vessels is impossible to imagine; like believing Atlantis acquiring technology ahead of us, or the Romans have piped water. It's more believable that they travel on foot, and that they still live in Pangea (the combination of the 7 continents in one single landmass), by common (non)sense. How to hunter gatherers hunt and gather fruits/vegetables on their boat? Did their boats resemble something of today, or just planks? Did they know how to use the winds? 

Author next introduced the Agricultural Revolution. Basically, the foundation of plants that could be planted, like wheat, maize (corn), potatoes; and animals like cow, sheep, chicken, pigs could be tamed. The mind-boggling idea is that **plant enslaves us, not we tame plants.**

The pros of Agricultural Revolution we easily know, as we're the beneficial party. What about the cons? Author have lots of suggestions, and one'll list a few here. One, our body don't produce all necessary nutrients, and we intake them instead. Unfortunately, most single plant don't have all these nutrients we need, so our poor ancestors probably live with such malnourishment. Second, you work less time as a hunter gatherer than as a peasant; for wheat is like a baby that needs intensive care. Third, if drought, flood, pestilence hits, dependence on a single crop means much higher risk than dependence on tens of hundreds of different food source. Fourth, we thought it provides more food; but to plant more food, we need more hands at the field; and more hands means more mouth. Sure, it's undeniable that a very small percentage managed to escaped the field and go on to write our human history books. Fifth, natural disaster affecting a single crop means human have to think further into the future, to store food like squirrels. As a side effect, _homo sapiens_ now unlock "anxiety", as if you're not relying on a single crop, there's no need to worry about "no yield." 

As a sidenote, author compared the enslavement of _homo sapiens_ by crops, to us nowadays by emails. In the snail mail era, it's difficult to send a parcel to a far distance, neither is it cheap. You'd think twice whom you'd want to write to, and you'd think a lot what you'd want to put down, knowing that you won't receive their replies until months later. Today, the easiness of sending emails (and of course, text messages) via a click, and being instantaneous, for a very cheap price (even without subscribing for a plan, your internet cost per MB probably won't cost more than sending a physical letter), makes us send mindless letters and text. Read more in [3]. Luxuries turned into necessities, necessities turned into obligations. Someone would start to call you to remind you to reply to them if you haven't reply within minutes! Such stupidity. 

One would like to give 2 examples:

First, the mobile phone. Probably first invented for military use, then later for business use like those of Ericsson (if one's not mistaken), then later for commercial and home use. We turned it from a device that facilitates our life, to enslaves our life. Can you live without a mobile phone today? You probably don't, except for the few. 

Given these examples, one can't stop convincing oneself that human beings love being enslaved by external objects, as if they allow us to not take actions, as the object to be blamed and thrown responsibility to, when we're the ones which allow ourselves enslaved by them. 

Second example, a game called "Last Fortress." Few weeks into the game, they introduce [Alliance Duel](https://last-fortress-underground.fandom.com/wiki/Alliance_Duel)", which is an event that lasts until the end of the game (One never played till the end of the game, but someone mentioned there will be 4 or 5 seasons, with each season about 90 - 100 days, and the event starts about a month after the world is created [if my memory got it correct]), with a weekly cycle. 

- Monday, collect resources. You'd send your truck out to collect resources. Each truck dig for 5-8 hours before they're full and return. Points gained upon "collect", so you'd send your truck 5-8 hours (minus a few minutes, to ensure it come back AFTER the event starts) before the event starts, and it'll come back on time to boost your points. You'd set your alarm every 5-8 hours to disrupt whatever you're doing and turn your attention to resource gathering. Alternatively, you'd keep the screen on and check every few minutes or so, with great anxiety, to see if it's time or not. 
- Tuesday, collect buildings. You need to start building on Wednesday (one day after the event finish), but don't "collect" them after they're finished. Then, "collect" them on Tuesday. 
- Wednesday, research. Save your speedups for today. There's also a handshake protocol where alliance members could help you to speedup your research. You want to ask for the handshake first before using your speedup, because the former is based on percentage (up to a limit) of the current time left (not the initial time), while the latter is absolute no. of minutes. And alas, other people have their things to do, so they can't give you handshake immediately, and you'd have to wait. Usually one and a half hour wasted just like that. 
- Thursday, recruit heroes. This is least time consuming, taking around 15-30 minutes pressing "recruit" and "skip" button, plus some pauses with applause when you get "legendary heroes." 
- Friday, soldier training. Similar to research, etc; but harder. There's a limit of how many soldiers you can train, and the speedups aren't as effective as research speedups, because higher level soldiers train longer, and they don't scale linearly with the no. of speedups you can get. Therefore, to earn more points, people will wage war on weaklings, which consumes another one or two hours before you get enough points to not get kicked out of the top 1 alliance. (Top 1 alliance requires you to meet minimal points to not get kicked out, otherwise, how can they remain top 1?)
- Saturday, this is the worse. It requires you to spend your whole day on the screen, because it's war day. And like real war, you can only be prepared constantly for an invasion, and won't know when an invasion happens. Later in the game, most members might communicate to agree on a time where they'll start war; but given the difference in timezone and some people who don't receive the message, or just want to fight outside of the agreed time, you still have to keep an eye all day long. Your whole Saturday wasted and ruined. 

In conclusion, slave to the game. When one realized this so badly, one quit immediately. Ok, not immediately, but after procrastinating for 2 weeks, one can't hold it anymore, one quit. 

--- 
(to be edited)

Back to the book, author said that, we probably need hands to build temples, that's why they can't forage or hunt anymore. Planting wheat yield more food, enough to feed those full-time working to build the temple (and perhaps the priest after the temple is built, if they have one). 

Plus, it's a catastrophe. If you understand animal torturing nowadays (on sheep, cow, chicken, and pigs), and how they slowly kill the animals by letting it bleed to death rather than "one slash KO no feel hurt baby" (that's why if you cook meat today, you found their blood aggregates a lot in their meat, because they encounter great stress before death that blood leaks into their muscles, which we call "meat"). Yes, they expand their numbers, but not their happiness. 

Plus before today, there's also human slaves, so human suffering is widespread. Plus, how do you know that nowadays human don't suffer more than their ancestors after the Agricultural Revolution? 

Remember that we said Gods and LLC are imagined? Well, let's expand on that. Countries are imagined. Our laws are imagined. Author introduced this "mindbreaking" concept, where laws first determined, and enforced, and accepted, therefore, we together bring something to life. Is there such thing as Humanity Rights? No, actually not. For humans are not born equal. The most basic different is we all have different facial features, different fingerprints, different DNA. And most viewable (but we refuse to view) difference are we born into different families (rich, poor, or poverty), with or without defects, taller or shorter (or in the extreme), of different colors, of different genders. So, we're not equal. But modern people can't admit that, for that's what we want to imagine, that's our anchor. That we **_wish_** to have everyone treated equally, or at least about equal. Ask someone millenials ago and they'd say slaves and commoners and superior people are the rankings required and imagined, and everyone believes in it. 

Next, humans have limited brain capabilities, especially when dealing with numbers. So, some invented partial scripts (that can only communicate specific information) like numbers and some signs (signifying what the numbers represent) to record it in clay, papyrus, bamboo sticks, etc. With full scripts, you can write novels with it; but usually, given the bulk heaviness of woods/clay/papyrus, it's still used for more important stuffs, like recording history. The only "novels" were of Gods and mythology, which they don't consider as novels, but voices of God. Then, the invention of catalogue sustains a larger empire, for if you store stuffs randomly, how're you going to find where things are? Plus, empires actually have local elites taking care of their business (decentralized government) and only report up what they have done without central intervention (unless it's so bad, or unless it's between 2 municipalities). This allow stuffs to be kept small, so no one have to know more than what's below their level of control, and the top only need to know about the elites who control peasants and slaves. 

What strikes one is the invention of computer binary language. Of course, we don't really write in binaries, not even assembly language, most of the time. People use higher level language like Python and C#, or mid-level language like C++ and Rust, that's more nearer to human language. Yet, nearer to human language isn't equal to human language. Because computer can't understand us, and because they can't learn (not until recent decade), we have to do the learning, and we have to understand them, and be their translator. That's why we build compilers and interpretors to translate our code into binaries for the computer to execute. 

In fact, the rise of artificial intelligence, one now see that one reasoning is to solve this "human learn computer language" stuffs. Ok, maybe not solve, one would be happy to learn a new language, even if it's not human language. Yet, for the majority who just can't twist their brain, typing something into a chatbox and have it generate the equivalent computer code for you (albeit, quite mundane code, sometimes stupid) means you don't need to learn the computer language to write decent code of small project. Just use your language. (Of course, you still need the ability to put your thoughts into words, and improve your writing and thinking skill). Take a look at [Clear Thinking](https://fs.blog/clear/) by Shane Parrish, and some books like [On Writing Well](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/53343.On_Writing_Well) by William Zinsser, or [The Elements of Style](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/33514.The_Elements_of_Style) by Strunk and White; they might help. 

(Chapter 8 onwards not yet read)

### Conclusion
Author really introduces stuff from viewpoints that one never encountered. It's worth reading, for it opens one's mind to something new, than from our usual viewpoints. 


### Notes: 
1. One isn't sure about Atlantis; so far, it seems like a myth. 
2. Romans have piped water, that's right! It's called "aqueduct." 
3. Most of us nowadays only write without edit. To turn back and re-read your work is more burdensome than clicking "send", which isn't the case for snail mail. Furthermore, the easiness of sending message has developed a ugly habit amongst users, where people no longer write in paragraphs, and worse, not even sentences. The "send button" had enslaved their minds to constantly click it after typing a few words. Another ugly, self-centered habit is to interrupt people in the middle. Example, one need some time to think about what one write, and explain it in a way that's understandable. However, people just keep sending me messages. One usually dealt with it by not reading anything sent between two message blocks (usually one block is image, another block of text, because they can't be send together, or there's limitations on the caption that one need to type longer messages so have to separate them), plus a restrain on oneself to not feel the Fear of Missing Out, so what they say without thinking isn't important. 
4. Since the event starts at 10.30 AM my local time, that means one would have to wake up early for it; one refuse to wake up at 4 AM or 5 AM-ish, so one wake at 7 AM; and that does change one's life a bit. Before, one wake up at 9 AM and slept late; now that one don't play the game anymore, it doesn't regress back and one still wake up around 7.30 AM. Great! 