# Afterthought: Hidden Potential by Adam Grant
afterthought

<p class="text-center"><em>Potential isn't the matter of where you start, but of how far you travel.</em></p>

Humans don't always live up to their capabilities. For example, one would waste time reading novels, because it's indulging; as other types of interesting activities like learning and "flow" uses brainpower, hence uses energy; and participating in social, one need one's friends to agree, which isn't always possible, and unfortunately one isn't one with lots of friends. Normally, human tries to save energy by being dormant, and that leaves hidden potential to unleash, at least to an extent, without burning out. 

Unless one stays within one's comfort zone, discomfort is inevitable. Yet, learning doesn't happen within one's comfort zone -- you'd know "everything" already. Mistakes is inevitable during learning, and actively seeking to learn means embracing discomfort. Our working memory can only store so much, so you'd have to use what you learn while learning, not waiting till the end. 

It's what happens in nature: adaptation. Adaptation means learning whatever useful, and apply it to survive. Those that can't adapt are long dead, at least of other species. Continuous improvement means seeking out new information that benefits adaptation. **_What's the one thing one can do better?_** 

When author introduced Tadao Ando and his square box house, one remembered feeling impressed. One had last been a perfectionist probably 8 years ago, and gradually put down the "requirement of a virgo", as one realized it'd require tremendous effort to finish the 20 of the 80/20. Yet, one still can't put it whole down, striving for 90 or 85. Today, that struck one, probably it's time to put down some things. _Perhaps that user interface needn't be pixel perfect._ _Perhaps one don't need to create this function, list it as optional, and forget about it._ _It might bring in less users, but it's okay._ Of course, the book mentioned to **have high personal standards, not pursuing perfection**, so that means we'd still have something great, just not perfect. And imperfect means? Continual learning. 

Actually, one developed a hatred for the word "passion". Emotionally, "passion" means "burnt out" to one, as when one's passion towards something, one'd get so excited about it that one burnt out. Physically, one would devote day till night on the subject because one can't stop, driven by "passion"; and everyday, one'd feel one's skin burning. Alas, after 3 months, one'd stop altogether as passion don't lasts. So, one actually disagree with the "harmonious passion", instead opt for "limited devotion." Meaning? However excited one feels, **never devote day and night on the subject.** One'd need the courage to overcome the insatiable appetite to continue stuffs at night, instead opt for something else that don't drains. Depending on different people, one need much longer than average downtime than most. (Author does mention this at the end of Chapter 4.)

The misty future is what holds one's back. The emotional burden to unlearn what's learn, to learn more, or learn correct, is huge. If there's no lamppost to guide one's way, the uncertainty barrier may be so huge it's not overcome-able. It's a wonder, how those lamp post of a new field, of human being, fails and fails and fails, just to search for a way out. We who follows their footstep, guided by their light, took it for granted. And what say those whom discouraged the person, hands over his/her bodies, trying to hold him/her back, not to move away from them? (S)He pushed and pushed and pushed, break through the barriers of hands, all holding on him/her, until the last hand breaks, and finally be by him/her-self, surrounded by mist. (S)he then sat down, woods and sticks and stones magically appear, and lit a bonfire. 

As the fire rages, clearing the mists around, (s)he could see the distant cities, and faces looking toward his/her direction, still wishing for his/her return. (S)He turned back, smiled, and continue on his/her journey, leaving the bonfire behind. It's the first bonfire, but will never be the last. Gradually, children, adults came, gathering around that bonfire, eyes sparkling at the new scene never seen, before acceptance settle. 

Do they still remember (s)he who laid the bonfire? 

### P.S:
[Post any suggestions here](https://github.com/Wabinab/Wabinab.github.io/discussions/2), one'll read it and consider the changes. 